FILE: D:\LiuZhiWei\Documents\STUDTORWORK\研0\SJTU relative project\references\AM-LUT\AddNet_Deep_Neural_Networks_Using_FPGA-Optimized_Multipliers - TVLSI20.pdf
PAGES: 14
--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020 115
AddNet: Deep Neural Networks Using
FPGA-Optimized Multipliers
Julian Faraone ,M a r t i nK u m m, Member , IEEE, Martin Hardieck, Peter Zipf, Member , IEEE,
Xueyuan Liu, David Boland, and Philip H. W. Leong , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract— Low-precision arithmetic operations to accelerate
deep-learning applications on ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) have been studied extensively, because they offer the
potential to save silicon area or increase throughput. However,
these beneﬁts come at the cost of a decrease in accuracy. In this
article, we demonstrate that reconﬁgurable constant coefﬁcient
multipliers (RCCMs) offer a better alternative for saving the
silicon area than utilizing low-precision arithmetic. RCCMs
multiply input values by a restricted choice of coefﬁcients using
only adders, subtractors, bit shifts, and multiplexers (MUXes),
meaning that they can be heavily optimized for FPGAs. We pro-
pose a family of RCCMs tailored to FPGA logic elements to
ensure their efﬁcient utilization. To minimize information loss
from quantization, we then develop novel training techniques
that map the possible coefﬁcient representations of the RCCMs
to neural network weight parameter distributions. This enables
the usage of the RCCMs in hardware, while maintaining high
accuracy. We demonstrate the beneﬁts of these techniques using
AlexNet, ResNet-18, and ResNet-50 networks. The resulting
implementations achieve up to 50% resource savings over
traditional 8-bit quantized networks, translating to signiﬁcant
speedups and power savings. Our RCCM with the lowest resource
requirements exceeds 6-bit ﬁxed point accuracy, while all other
implementations with RCCMs achieve at least similar accuracy
to an 8-bit uniformly quantized design, while achieving signiﬁcant
resource savings.
Index Terms — Digital arithmetic, ﬁeld programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs), neural networks, neural network hardware,
quantization.
I. I NTRODUCTION
C
ONVOLUTIONAL neural networks (CNNs) have been
widely adopted in recent computer vision applica-
tions due to their superior prediction capabilities, with
researchers gravitating toward larger networks with higher
Manuscript received February 12, 2019; revised June 5, 2019; accepted
August 11, 2019. Date of publication September 25, 2019; date of current
version December 27, 2019. This work was supported in part by the Australia–
Germany Joint Research Co-operation Scheme and in part by the German
Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) under Grant 57388068. (Corresponding
author: Julian Faraone.)
J. Faraone, X. Liu, D. Boland, and P. H. W. Leong are with the
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Syd-
ney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia (e-ma il: julian.faraone@sydney.edu.au;
david.boland@sydney.edu.au; philip.leong@sydney.edu.au).
M. Kumm is with the Applied Computer Science Faculty, Fulda University
of Applied Sciences, 36037 Fulda, Ge rmany (e-mail: martin.kumm@cs.
hs-fulda.de).
M. Hardieck and P. Zipf are with the Digital Technology Group, Uni-
versity of Kassel, 34121 Kassel, Germany ( e-mail: hardieck@uni-kassel.de;
zipf@uni-kassel.de).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this article are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TVLSI.2019.2939429
computational complexity and memory requirements [1].
Field-programmable gate array (FPGA) implementations have
demonstrated improved latency and power efﬁciency com-
pared with central processing unit (CPU) and graphics process-
ing unit (GPU) technologies (see [2] and [3]). In contrast
to CPU/GPU technologies, they allow customized data paths,
enabling improved parallelism and less data movement. This
design ﬂexibility poses an opportunity to optimize system per-
formance through custom hardware tailored to the application.
Optimizations via compression, quantization, and neural
network layer explorations have been utilized to reduce com-
plexity and boost performance (see [4] and [5]). In particular,
quantizing inference networks to very low precision, such as
constraining weight representations to binary or ternary values,
both reduces memory requirements and enables multiplica-
tions to be replaced with the exclusive
NOR operation [3], [6].
However, the disadvantage of extreme quantization is that the
networks typically incur signi ﬁcant accuracy degradation for
very low precisions, especially for complex problems.
One limitation with traditional ﬁxed-point quantization is
that it has a uniform distribution. However, it has been
demonstrated that a nonuniform distribution with the same
number of potential weights can result in better accuracy,
provided the distribution appropriately matches the desired
full-precision neural network weight distribution [7], [8]. It
follows that reducing precision may not be the best method
to save silicon area. Reconﬁgurable constant coefﬁcient mul-
tipliers (RCCMs) are an alternative method to reduce FPGA
resources through time multiplexi ng and resource sharing [9].
They are usually realized using additions, subtractions, bit
shifts, and multiplexers (MUXes), meaning that multiplies
are implemented without requiring digital signal processing
(DSP) blocks on an FPGA. However, RCCMs are restricted
to a given number of target coefﬁcients; this has restricted
their use to DSP application domains including digital ﬁltering
and linear transformations (see [10]). We propose a method,
AddNet, to design RCCMs with coefﬁcient sets that approx-
imate the desired distribution of neural network weights.
Furthermore, we develop a method to train neural networks to
take advantage of RCCMs. In doing so, we demonstrate that
using AddNet to optimize neural networks outperforms low-
precision arithmetic in terms of accuracy for a given silicon
area budget.
AddNet consists of the following stages. First, we design
a family of RCCMs which are customized to the underlying
1063-8210 © 2019 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: ShanghaiTech University. Downloaded on January 28,2026 at 08:08:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
116 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020
logic elements on the FPGA. These exhibit very low resource
usage and have varying coefﬁcient sets. The RCCM coefﬁcient
set whose distribution best replicates the weight distribution
of a pretrained network is chosen and the network is retrained
with weights restricted to these coefﬁcients. This allows the
optimizer to update network weight parameters during training
while incorporating information about the underlying hard-
ware. This study does not consider the embedded multipliers
present in all modern FPGAs; in practical implementations,
we envisage different CNN layers using embedded multipli-
ers or our RCCM, depending on resource and thr oughput
requirements.
The trained network is able to learn a representation com-
patible with the underlying optimized RCCM, achieving both
high performance and accuracy . This allows a signiﬁcant
reduction in resource usage for a given throughput, making
our designs suitable for resource-constrained implementations.
Additionally, we can scale the parallelism of the design to
achieve much higher frame rates for similar resource usages.
Speciﬁcally, this article makes the following contributions.
1) A novel family of arithmetic RCCM circuits tailored to
the FPGA fabric for neural network applications which
signiﬁcantly reduces resource requirements.
2) A distribution matching technique which allows a
speciﬁc RCCM to be selected based on the required
distribution of weights in a CNN and a training algo-
rithm which ﬁnds solutions compatible with the selected
RCCM.
3) We demonstrate that our method achieves signiﬁcant
improvement in accuracy over low-precision (1–6 bit)
implementations and signiﬁcant reductions in lookup
table (LUT) usage over 8-bit ﬁxed-point precision with
no loss in accuracy for state-of-the-art networks such
as ResNet [11] implemented in ﬁxed point. More-
over, weight storage requirements are reduced through
implicit weight sharing.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
Section II provides a background to training CNNs and
constant coefﬁcient multipliers. In Section III, recent state-
of-the-art research on quantization training and hardware
architectures for the implem entation of CNNs is reviewed.
Our methodology for designing our RCCMs is described in
Section IV. Our training techniques and selection of RCCM
are presented in Section V. The hardware architecture used
for evaluating the effects of our methods is described in
Section VI, followed by training and resource usage results in
Section VII. Finally, we conclude this article in Section VIII.
II. B
ACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss the basic computation of CNNs
and introduce ﬁxed-point traini ng and softcore multiplier opti-
mizations.
A. Convolutional Neural Networks
CNNs are biologically inspired networks that process input
tensors (multidimensional arrays) of (w, h, d) dimensions in
a translationally invariant manner [1]. Typically, w and h are
spatial dimensions and d is the number of channels. Process-
ing operations, such as convolution, pooling, and activation
functions, are applied in a series of layers, each of which
transforms the input tensors from dimensions (w, h, d) →
(w, h, d). A convolutional layer produces d output chan-
nels, each formed through a convolution of the input tensor
with a Jl × Kl convolutional kernel window, where typically
Jl, Kl  w, h, so it operates on local input regions. The
output of convolutional layer l takes as input Sl images of
spatial dimensions wl and hl and d is the number of neurons.
The pixel yl,d,w,h at location (w, h) for the dth neuron is
calculated as
yl,w,h,d = g
⎛
⎝
S j
s=0
Jl
j=0
Kl
k=0
wl,d,s, j,k · yl−1,d,w+ j,h+k
⎞
⎠ (1)
where g is the elementwise activation function [such as the
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) function g(x) = max(0, x)]. The
outputs of a layer are used as inputs to the next layer. A 2-D
convolutional layer can be described as matrix multiplication,
followed by the elementwise activation function. Similarly,
the output of a fully connected layer can be described as
y = g(W
T x) (2)
where x ∈ Rd×w×h is the input, y ∈ Rd×w×h
is the
output, and W ∈ Rd×d×w×h are the weights of a linear
transformation. Convolutional layers form the bottleneck for
CNN implementations, and this tensor form allows efﬁcient
matrix-multiplication libraries to be applied.
Pooling layers are downsamplers of 2-D images. Max
pooling layers provide a spatial maximum function, which
divides an input image into small subtiles of a given window
size and then replaces these w ith the maximum value in the
subtile. An average pooling layer is similar; however, it ﬁnds
the average in the subtile rather than the maximum.
B. Fixed-Point Training
Deep neural network (DNN) training is an iterative process
which has a feedforward path to compute the output and a
backpropagation path for learning, which involves calculating
gradients and update the network weights. Training of low-
precision networks typically involves maintaining a set of
single- or double-precision ﬂoating point weights W which
are quantized to a representation q prior to inference (see [6]).
As the quantization functions employed are piecewise and
constant, the gradients of quantized weights can be calcu-
lated and applied to update their corresponding full-precision
weights [12]. A quantization function which reduces mismatch
in forward and backward paths i s crucial for high accuracy.
To further improve accuracy, an alternative to low-precision
networks is to use a weight-sharing approach [13], [14].
Weight sharing involves choosing a ﬁnite set of full-precision
weights indexed by a codebook. Typically, these weights are
chosen to match the desired distribution to reduce information
loss, unlike traditional ﬁxed-point quantization where weights
are uniformly distributed. Keeping the number of different
weights in the codebook small reduces the word size of the
indices leading to a small memory footprint. However, weight
Authorized licensed use limited to: ShanghaiTech University. Downloaded on January 28,2026 at 08:08:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
FARAONE et al. : AddNet: DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS USING FPGA-OPTIMIZED MULTIPLIERS 117
sharing is normally not applied in FPGA implementations as
the weight mapping process introduces additional delays in
the critical path of the circuit and requires extra hardware.
Furthermore, higher precision arithmetic units also consume
more area. For the proposed RCCM, an implicit weight sharing
is utilized, reducing coefﬁcien t memory without requiring any
mapping hardware. Meanwhile, our RCCMs are optimized for
FPGA hardware, meaning that they consume less area than
ﬁxed-point equivalents.
C. Small Softcore Multipliers
Due to the low-precision requirements of neural networks,
efﬁcient implementations of small multipliers recently have
gained growing interest [15], [16]. As FPGAs provide embed-
ded multipliers, it seems natural to use them. For small
multiplications, there is a way to perform two multiplications
up to 8×8 bit in a single DSP of typically 18 bits [16]. In case
the embedded multipliers are not sufﬁcient, efﬁcient logic-
based (i.e., softcore) multiplier implementations are necessary.
The use of radix-4 Booth encoding together with an FPGA
mapping that maps both Booth encoder and decoders in the
same LUT showed to be the most efﬁcient way to implement
softcore multipliers leading to up to 50% resource reductions
[17], [18] on Xilinx FPGAs. Unfortunately, they are only
this efﬁcient for large word sizes of 16 bits and above. For
lower word sizes, Xilinx Coregen showed the best results [18].
An optimization which is particularly suited for small mul-
tipliers by restructuring common multiplier algorithms was
recently proposed in [15]. They were optimized for Intel
Stratix 10 showing the smallest resources and latency. The
optimizations described in our work add further constraints
designing multipliers which do not allow arbitrary ﬁxed-point
number support. This is achieved by applying concepts from
reconﬁgurable multipliers.
III. R
ELATED WORK
Many quantization methods for neural networks have been
explored with the aim of achieving efﬁcient inference in
hardware. An efﬁcient way of training networks with dif-
ferent forward and backward functions was introduced in
[12]. This led to new derivations of uniform quantization
functions for low-precision neural networks in [19] and [20].
Learning symmetric quantization (SYQ) [21] further explored
the importance of initializations and designing a quantization
function which reduces the forward and backward mismatches.
They achieved state-of-the-art accuracies under low-precision
weights and activations. This inspired the derivation of the
distribution matching initialization method for efﬁcient quan-
tization. Effective nonuniform quantization forms were also
explored in the form of log representations [7]. This form can
also compute multiplier-less multiply and accumulate (MACs)
operations; however, the distribution of the representations is
restricted to the log domain.
There have been several accelerator architecture designs
for low-precision CNNs with uniform quantization arithmetic.
Recent literature includes commercial architectures [22], [23]
and also academic approaches [24]–[28]. The beneﬁts, in terms
of power and throughput, of ﬁtting a design on-chip was
Fig. 1. Example of a reconﬁgurable multiplier with the coefﬁcient set
{12305, 20746}.
described in [3]. Other FPGA architectures have been imple-
mented to utilize the highly amenable nature of CNNs which
constrain weight parameters to be only binary or ternary
representations [29], [30]. With restrictions in the efﬁciency
of both software and hardware implementations of neural net-
works, software-hardware codesign is considered an effective
approach to achieve optimal performance [31], [32]. A method
for designing a quantization function for both increasing accu-
racy of binarized CNNs while maintaining efﬁcient multiplier-
less hardware was proposed in [33]. In addition, an efﬁcient
long short-term memory (LSTM) implementation in [34]
utilized load-balance-aware pruning to achieve both network
compression and high hardware utilization. Similarly, training
highly sparse ternary networks and designing efﬁcient CNN
hardware for exploitation was described in [30]. To the best of
our knowledge, AddNet is the ﬁrst quantization scheme which
embeds reconﬁgurability directly into its representations.
IV . A
DDNET RECONFIGURABLE MULTIPLIERS
In this section, we introduce r econﬁgurable multipliers and
describe their design in AddNet.
A. Reconﬁgurable Multipliers
A constant coefﬁcient multiplier is a circuit which computes
y = cx , using only additions, subtractions, and bit shifts,
where c is some predeﬁned number. For example, to compute
y = 6x in terms of additions and shifts, we can use
(x << 2) + (x << 1) = 6x. (3)
The “<<” operator represents an arithmetic left shift.
An RCCM is a circuit which computes y = cs x,
where cs is an element from a discrete coefﬁcient set
C ={ c0, c1,..., cN−1}, chosen from a log2(N) bit select
signal s [35]. RCCMs are usually realized using additions,
subtractions, bit shifts, and MUXes. Previous work has shown
potential for reducing resource usage compared with a generic
multiplier, especially for small values of N [9], [35]–[37].
Fig. 1 shows an example of an RCCM with coefﬁcient
set C ={ 12305, 20746}. In this example, there is one
Authorized licensed use limited to: ShanghaiTech University. Downloaded on January 28,2026 at 08:08:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
118 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020
2:1 MUX for each adder, each having s as the select line
input. The three adders sum various shifted versions of x.
Each adder is assigned a coefﬁcient set where the value of
each row corresponds to the multiple for each conﬁguration.
For instance, the top-most adder computes

x + (x << 1) = 3x, if s = 0
x + (x << 2) = 5x, if s = 1.
The bottom-most adder outputs the ﬁnal output y with coefﬁ-
cient set C ={ c
0, c1}={ 12305, 20746} multiplier-less by
y =
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎩
x + ((x << 3) + ((x + x << 1), if s = 0
<< 11)< < 1) = 12305x
(x <<8)+((x+x <<2)+((x+x <<2), if s = 1
<< 11)< < 1) = 20746x.
By utilizing MUXes in this way, the computation of c
1 =
12305 is able to reuse the adders from computing c2 = 20746
and vice versa.
To date, prior research with RCCMs has focused on the
design of an RCCM for a predeﬁned set of target con-
stants (e.g., obtained from a digital ﬁlter design). This design
using minimal resources is an NP-complete optimization prob-
lem [36]. However, we want to use RCCMs in neural networks,
where the coefﬁcients (weights) are not known in advance.
As a result, we invert the RCCM design, and instead of
searching for an RCCM circuit for a given coefﬁcient set, this
article aims to ﬁnd one with very low resource usage and a
maximum of “useful” coefﬁcients. This low-cost RCCM then
replaces multipliers in a conventional CNN implementation.
Instead of storing the coefﬁcients, the corresponding select
values are stored, which also has the side effect that it requires
fewer bits of storage than the direct coefﬁcient value.
B. FPGA Multiplier Mapping
We searched for building blo cks that efﬁciently map to
the logic fabric of an FPGA. Ou r designs are optimized for
the latest Xilinx FPGAs (Virtex 5 +6, the seventh generation
FPGAs and UltraScale/UltraScale + FPGAs), but similar cir-
cuits can be found for other FPGAs. For these devices, a slice
provides either six-input LUTs with a single output (used in
Topology A) or two ﬁve-input LUTs with shared inputs (used
in Topology B). As such, we designed our base topologies to
ensure the MUXes ﬁt into the same LUTs that are required
for the adders.
Fig. 2 shows the two base topologies used to build the
RCCM units in this article. Each of these consists of an
adder with at least one input being the output of a MUX.
These topologies allow operations of the form ±A
p ± Bq.F o r
Topology A, A p can consist of up to four different input values
( p ∈ 1, ..,4) with A4 = 0a n d Bq can only take one value,
that is, (q = 1). For Topology B, p ∈ 1, ..,3 with A3 = 0a n d
q ∈ 1, 2, with B2 = 0. The sign and source signals are selected
using a 2-bit input signal s. Since there are more possibilities
than MUX inputs, a function σ( s) is used to choose the actual
operation, where σ( s) is determined at the design time but
may be different for each individual RCCM. Note that there
is another possibility to map more input sources to the adder
Fig. 2. Base topologies used to build reconﬁgurable multipliers. (a) Topol-
ogy A. (b) Topology B.
as described in [38]; however, to ensure the topology ﬁts into a
single LUT, this comes at a cost of less select inputs. Through
our experimentation, we found that the chosen topologies were
sufﬁcient for creating RCCMs with a desired coefﬁcient set
to simplify the training process. This is further described in
Section V.
All contemporary FPGA devices are similar in that their
logic blocks consist of LUTs followed by a fast carry chain.
Hence, a simple adder can be extended by MUXes with no
additional cost for certain MUX sizes when carefully selected
for the target device. The detailed slice mappings of our base
topologies are shown in Fig. 3, highlighting how our design
consumes exactly the same silicon area as a traditional ripple-
carry adder with the same word size on that FPGA (which
would only implement the
XOR gate to complete the carry
logic to a full adder).
C. Architectures Considered
The base topologies described previously can be com-
bined in many ways to design RCCM units. T opology A
has the advantage of a potentially larger coefﬁcient set as
it allows three different sources at input A p. On the other
hand, Topology B has the property that input Bq can be
negated or zeroed, which provides symmetric coefﬁcients
around zero (as A p − B1 =− (−A p + B1)). We designed three
different RCCM architectures from these t opologies shown
in Fig. 4. These consist of one to three elements of Topology
A in the early stages and Topology B at the output stage to
ensure symmetric coefﬁcients. Symmetric coefﬁcients improve
the ability to match the distribution of the coefﬁcient sets to
the pretrained neural network weights which are typically and
also approximately symmetric around zero. The beneﬁts of
this are further discussed in Section V. Note also that these
designs can be trivially pipelined.
As shown in Fig. 4, the A
p inputs to the topologies are all
connected to left shift operations ϕij , which are all hard-wired,
since these do not require any LUT resources. It follows that
the supported coefﬁcient set depends on the operation mapping
function σ( s) and the ﬁxed bit shifts ϕij . As mentioned
in Section IV-B, each instance of base Topology A or B
consumes the same area as a traditional ripple-carry adder.
Hence, as the RCCMs of Fig. 4 consist of two, three, and four
base topologies, they are, respectively, called 2-Add, 3-Add,
and 4-Add RCCMs in the following.
Authorized licensed use limited to: ShanghaiTech University. Downloaded on January 28,2026 at 08:08:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
FARAONE et al. : AddNet: DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS USING FPGA-OPTIMIZED MULTIPLIERS 119
Fig. 3. Bit-level FPGA slice mapping of base topologies of Fig. 2. This is a pplicable to any FPGA using six-input LUTs, including Xilinx Ultrascale and
Intel Stratix X devices. (a) Topology A. (b) Topology B.
The obtained RCCM architectures can multiply with up
to 2 ws different coefﬁcients, where ws denotes the total
number of bits used for the select signal. For the 2-Add,
3-Add, and 4-Add RCCMs, this translates to w
s = 4, 6,
and 8, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4. We chose to evaluate
coefﬁcient sets where Topology A had four different mapping
functions and Topology B had a s ingle one. In addition, all
maximum bit shifts were set to ϕmax = 3. This limits the total
number of unique combinations, as shown in Table I. With
these coefﬁcient sets, an exhaustive enumeration of possible
coefﬁcient combinations is feasible with a few minutes of
computation time. This allows us to then ﬁnd the desired
coefﬁcient set based on its similarity to the pretrained neural
network weight distribution. We note that it may be possible to
improve on our results by exploring more mapping functions,
which would generate a larger number of unique coefﬁcient
sets but at the cost of longer execution time.
V. A
DDNET TRAINING
Section IV described a family of optimized multipliers.
In this section, we now address the issue of ﬁnding the best
coefﬁcient set for a given neural network. Neural networks can
TABLE I
PROPERTIES OF THE EVA L UAT I O N O F T H EPROPOSED RCCM U NITS WITH
MAXIMUM POSSIBLE SET SIZE S = 2ws
typically tolerate a certain amount of regularization for their
weight representations befo re the accuracy is impinged upon.
Thus, our strategy is to utilize this knowledge and select an
RCCM coefﬁcient set which exhibits a distribution similar to
the distributions of the neural network weights and retrain the
network to learn the representation of the coefﬁcient set.
A. Distribution Matching
To achieve high accuracy in quantized neural network
training, it is important to reduce quantization error by
using a function which can efﬁciently map its representations
to the full-precision values. This is important to minimize
Authorized licensed use limited to: ShanghaiTech University. Downloaded on January 28,2026 at 08:08:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 