FILE: D:\LiuZhiWei\Documents\STUDTORWORK\研0\SJTU relative project\references\AM-LUT\An Efficient Softcore Multiplier Architecture for Xilinx FPGAs - ARITH15.pdf
PAGES: 8
--- PAGE 1 ---
An Efﬁcient Softcore Multiplier Architecture for Xilinx FPGAs
Martin Kumm, Shahid Abbas and Peter Zipf
University of Kassel, Germany
Digital Technology Group
Email: kumm@uni-kassel.de, shahid.abbas@student.uni-kassel.de, zipf@uni-kassel.de
Abstract
This work presents an efﬁcient implementation of
a softcore multiplier , i. e., a multiplier architecture
which can be efﬁciently mapped to the slice resources
of modern Xilinx FPGAs. Instead of dividing the
multiplication into the generation of partial products
and the summation using a compressor tree, as done
in modern multipliers, an array-like architecture is
proposed. Each row of the array generates a partial
product which is directly added to results of previous
rows using the fast carry chain. A radix-4 Booth
encoding/decoding is used to reduce the I/O count of
the partial product generation which makes it possible
to map both, the Booth encoder and decoder , into a
single 6-input look up table (LUT). Like a conventional
Booth multiplier , this nearly halves the number of
rows compared to a ripple carry array multiplier . In
addition, the compressor tree is completely avoided
and an efﬁcient and regular structure retains that uses
up to 50 % less slice resources compared to previous
approaches and offers a multiply accumulate (MAC)
operation without extra resources.
1. Introduction
Efﬁcient multipliers are a key element for many
applications in the domain of digital signal process-
ing, image processing, scientiﬁc computing and many
more. This demand on multipliers and their large
complexity when mapped to the logic of ﬁeld pro-
grammable gate arrays (FPGAs) forced the vendors to
embed hard multiplier blocks and DSP blocks (which
include pre and post addition) into the fabric of mod-
ern FPGAs. However, there are two main limitations
when using embedded multipliers or DSP blocks: First,
only a limited number is available and second, their
word size is restricted. Furthermore, they have ﬁxed
locations and are often asymmetric in word size (like
the 18× 24 multiplier in Xilinx FPGAs). The limited
word size can be extended by using several smaller
multipliers and additional adders. A method called
tiling was proposed to construct large multiplications
using several DSP blocks and softcore multipliers in
an efﬁcient way [1], [2]. Here, the softcore multipliers
are needed to “ﬁll gaps” where a DSP block is too
large. Besides the large multipliers, many applications
require only small word size multipliers, like, e. g.,
image and video processing applications, where typical
word sizes are 8 to 10 bit. Here, large parts of the
DSP block are wasted. As a consequence, there is a
demand for softcore multipliers whenever DSP blocks
are not sufﬁcient or their word size does not match to
the requirements.
While a rich body of literature exists for parallel
multipliers in application speciﬁc integrated circuits
(ASICs), there is only few dealing with softcore mul-
tipliers on FPGAs. Kumar et al. presented a softcore
multiplier structure which is based on a Booth mul-
tiplier [3] where the partial products are obtained
from Booth recoding of one multiplicand and the
compressor tree is replaced by a ripple-carry adder
tree to beneﬁt from the fast carry chain of the FPGA
[4]. While this is suitable for the 4-input LUTs of old
FPGAs, much more is possible on modern FPGAs.
A softcore multiplier architecture that exploits the
low-level properties of modern FPGAs was presented
by Parandeh-Afshar et al. [5]. They showed that two
partial products of a Baugh-Wooley multiplier [6] can
be generated and already compressed in a single stage
of logic by using the two outputs of a look up table
(LUT) and the fast carry chain. The number of remain-
ing partial products is nearly halved like for the Booth
multiplier which avoids the Booth decoding/encoding
logic. However, a compressor tree is still required to
obtain the ﬁnal product. This architecture is reviewed
in Section 2.1.
Another totally different concept is to compose a
multiplier out of several smaller multipliers and ad-
ditions. The idea of using small multipliers which ﬁt
2015 IEEE 22nd Symposium on Computer Arithmetic
1063-6889/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ARITH.2015.17
18


--- PAGE 2 ---
Table 1: 4× 4 bit multiplication scheme
a3b0 a2b0 a1b0 a0b0
+ a3b1 a2b1 a1b1 a0b1
+ a3b2 a2b2 a1b2 a0b2
+ a3b3 a2b3 a1b3 a0b3
= p7 p6 p5 p4 p3 p2 p1 p0
into few FPGA LUTs was mentioned but not further
investigated by de Dinechin et al. [7]. They proposed
to map a 3 ×3 multiplier in six 6-input LUTs which
work in parallel, leading to a delay of a single LUT.
These partial results have to be bit-shifted and added
which can be done using a compressor tree.
The compressor tree is a crucial part in multipliers.
While it was believed for a long time that ripple
carry adders are the best choice to realize a multi-
input addition on FPGAs, it was demonstrated in the
last years that the usage of compressor trees with
generalized parallel counters (GPCs) as replacement of
full-adders can improve this. While in early work, the
delay could be reduced by compressor trees [8]–[11], it
was shown recently that also the resources can be saved
by exploiting the low level structure of FPGAs [12],
[13]. However, the compressor tree typically occupies
a signiﬁcant part of the total resources of the multiplier.
In this work, an optimized softcore multiplier ar-
chitecture is presented which completely avoids the
compressor tree. This is done by merging the Booth
recoding scheme of a Booth multiplier with the (ripple-
carry) summation of the partial products in a single
stage of LUTs, fast carry chains and (optionally) ﬂip
ﬂops (FFs). The result is a regular array-like structure
which is also capable to perform a multiply accumulate
(MAC) operation. Besides the combinatorial imple-
mentation, a pipeline extension of the architecture is
discussed which can be obtained by a few additional
slice resources for FFs. Results are obtained from
several synthesis experiments which are compared with
Xilinx Coregen [14], the Parandeh-Afshar multiplier,
which was ported to the Virtex 6 FPGA [5], and several
variants of the idea presented in [7].
2. Review of FPGA Multiplier Architec-
tures
In the following, previous multiplier architectures
are reviewed. The presentation is done for unsigned
numbers for the sake of simplicity. The extension to
signed numbers is straight forward and is indicated
where needed for the proposed multiplier.
0
1
0
1
0
1
Carry
Logic
0
1
LUTLUTLUTLUT
Figure 1: Slice conﬁguration for the Parandeh-Afshar
multiplier
2.1. Baugh-Wooley Multiplier
An N × M bit multiplication of two unsigned
binary numbers a =( aN −1 ...a 1a0) and b =
(bM −1 ...b 1b0), with ai,b i ∈{ 0, 1} can be written
as
p = a· b = a·
( M −1∑
m=0
2mbm
)
=
M −1∑
m=0
2m a· bm
partial product
.
(1)
Hence, the partial products a· bm can be obtained by a
bitwise AND-operation which are then bit-shifted and
added to get the ﬁnal product. Take, e. g., a 4× 4 bit
multiplication, the product p is obtained by summing
four partial products as shown in Table 1.
The probably most straight forward way to do this is
realized with the ripple-carry array (RCA) multiplier.
Its modiﬁcation for two’s complement inputs is better
known as the Baugh-Wooley multiplier [6]. Here, a
basic cell which includes an AND gate and a full adder
(FA) is organized in a regular array where each row
corresponds to a ripple carry adder (RCA) which adds
the partial product of the current row ( m in (1)) with
the preceding results, yielding the product in the last
stage.
The idea of Parandeh-Afshar et al. was to map two
AND gates into the two-output LUT of the adaptive
logic modules (ALMs) of modern Altera Stratix FP-
GAs (beginning from Stratix-II) and to use the full
adders to add the partial results [5]. This structure can
be directly transferred to the Xilinx FPGA slice which
consists of four LUTs, fast carry chain logic and up to
eight FFs. A slice mapping is illustrated in Figure 1
for the ﬁrst two rows and the four least signiﬁcant
bit (LSB) columns of the example in Table 1. Here,
the two AND gates are used to generate the partial
products while the exclusive-or (XOR) gate in the
LUT, together with the XOR gate and the multiplexer
(MUX) in the carry logic form a full adder. With this
19

--- PAGE 3 ---
Figure 2: Tiling of a 8 × 8 multiplier using smaller
multipliers
conﬁguration, two partial products can be added which
halves the number of partial products (for even word
sizes). The sum of all partial products is computed by
using their compressor tree method [8]. Note that the
LSB positions of each partial product can be computed
with a single AND gate which slightly reduces the
carry-chain delay.
2.2. LUT-Multiplier-based Architecture
The idea of realizing an FPGA speciﬁc softcore
multiplier based on partial results of several 3 × 3
multipliers which were mapped to the FPGA LUTs
was proposed recently [7]. A 3× 3 multiplier has six
output bits and can be directly mapped to six 6-input
LUTs by tabulating the multiplication result for each
output bit. To build a larger multiplier the partial results
from these basic multipliers have to be shifted and
added. A simple graphical way to compute these shifts
was introduced with the tiling method [1], [2]. Here, an
N× M multiplication is visualized with a rectangle of
size N×M . Then, this rectangle is “tiled” with smaller
multipliers until the complete rectangle is ﬁlled. The
input bits of the small multipliers as well as the output
shifts can be directly obtained from the rectangle. Take
for example an 8 × 8 multiplier wich is represented
by the rectangle in Figure 2. It can be covered by
four 3 × 3 multipliers (M1, M2, M4 and M5), four
2× 3 multipliers (M3, M6, M7 and M8) and one 2× 2
multipler (M9). The 2×3 and 2×2 multipliers use less
LUTs due to the reduced output word size of 5 and 4,
respectively. Now, the inputs of a multiplier correspond
to the coordinate ranges in a and b directions. The
inputs of multiplier M6 for example are a3...5 and
b6...7. The necessary shift of the multiplier result is
equal to the sum of a and b coordinates of the upper
right corner of the small multiplier. Multiplier M6 has
to be shifted by 3+6 = 9 bit as its upper right corner
coordinate is a =3 and b =6 . The complete product
of the 8× 8 multiplier example is
p =M 1+2 3M 2+2 6M 3+ ... (2)
... +2 3M 4+2 6M 5+2 9M 6+ ... (3)
... +2 6M 7+2 9M 8+2 12M 9 (4)
where Mi corresponds to the result of multiplier i.
Besides the 3 × 3 basic multiplier, there are other
possible conﬁgurations which might be interesting.
On modern Xilinx FPGAs, the 6-input LUT can be
conﬁgured as two 5-input LUTs with shared inputs.
This allows to build a 3× 2 multiplier with only ﬁve
5-input LUTs which are mapped to three 6-input LUTs
(one 5-input LUT remains unused). Another way is to
realize a 1×4 multiplier with four 5-input LUTs which
are mapped to two 6-input LUTs. While these different
basic multipliers use the LUT resources in a more efﬁ-
cient way, the number of partial products is increased
signiﬁcantly which increases the compressor tree. The
three basic multipliers are evaluated experimentally in
Section 4.
3. Proposed Architecture
Before the proposed multiplier is presented, some
common concepts used in Booth multipliers are dis-
cussed.
3.1. Booth Multiplier
A well known multiplier and probably the most used
multiplier in the ASIC domain is the Booth multiplier
[3]. The main idea is to recode one of the inputs as
follows:
b =bM −12M −1 + ... + b222 + b121 + b0
=bM −12M −1 + ... + b222 +2 b121 + −b121 + b0  
BE0 =−2b1 +b0
=bM −12M −1 + ...
... +2 b323 −b323 + b222 +2 b121
  
BE2 =(−2b3 +b2 +b1 )22
+BE0
=
M∑
m=0
m even
BEm2m with BE m = −2bm+1 + bm + bm−1
(5)
The multiplication becomes
a· b =
M∑
m=0
m even
a· BEm2m . (6)
The values of the Booth encoder terms BE m are in
the range of −2 ... 2 as listed in Table 2. Hence, the
20

--- PAGE 4 ---
Table 2: Truth table of a Booth encoder
bm+1 bm bm−1 BEm zm cm sm
000 0 100
001 1 000
010 1 000
011 2 001
100 -2 011
101 -1 010
110 -1 010
111 0 100
c6
c6 c4
c4c4c4 c2
c2c2c2c2c2 c0
c0c0c0c0c0c0c0
0
0
0LSB
MSB
b
+
=
(a) Naive sign extension
c6
c6 c4
c41 c2
c21 c0
c0
11
0
0
0LSB
MSB
b
+
=
(b) Optimized sign extension
Figure 3: Sign extension in Booth multipliers [15]
partial products a·BEm can be obtained by shifting a if
|BEm| =2 (encoded by sm =1 ), complementing the
result if BE m < 0 (encoded by cm =1 ) or setting the
partial product to zero in case that BE m =0 (encoded
by zm =1 ). This nearly halves the number of partial
products and, thus, reduces the size of the compressor
tree which typically follows.
Due to this coding, the partial products may become
negative which requires a sign extension. The sign bit
of each partial product is identical to the complement
bit cm according to Table 2. If the complement bit
is set, the partial product has to be inverted and a ‘1’
must be added to the LSB position. The naive approach
is illustrated in the dot diagram in Figure 3(a). Here,
each row of dots represents a partial product which
is already inverted when the corresponding cm is set.
The conditional increment is done by adding the cm
0
1
0
1
Carry
Logic
0
1
0
0 1
0 1
0 1
LUTLUTLUT
0
0 1
0 1
0 1
LUT
0
1
Figure 4: Slice conﬁguration of the proposed multiplier
bit to the LSB position. The sign extension is done by
padding cm bits up to the MSB position of the product.
A well known technique to reduce the number of bits
for sign extension is to replace a bit vector of identical
bits by a vector of ones plus the inverted bit at LSB
position:
1111 ... 1111
+ ... x
= x xxxx ... xxxx
The MSB bit of the result x has to be ignored.
Applying this transformation to the dot diagram in
Figure 3(a) results in several overlapping rows of
constant ‘1’ bits which can be added in advance,
resulting in the dot diagram shown in Figure 3(b).
This representation is typically used as input of a
compressor tree that reduces the partial products to the
ﬁnal product. In the proposed architecture, each partial
product row is generated in a chain of FPGA slices
and previous intermediate results are directly added
to the current partial product. This is detailed in the
following.
3.2. Proposed FPGA Mapping
Each partial product row is mapped to a slice conﬁg-
uration as shown in Figure 4, the complete multiplier
array is given in Figure 5. We distinguish between
the three different LUT conﬁgurations A⃝, B⃝ and C⃝.
Except the two LUTs at the MSB positions n = N +2
and n = N +1 (leftmost LUTs in Figure 4), where n is
the column index of the corresponding row, all LUTs
are of conﬁguration A⃝. The rightmost LUT in Figure 4
has the only task to add cm to the LSB position. This
is due to a limitation that the carry-in of a slice can
only be set to constant ‘0’ or constant ‘1’ when the
zero-input of the carry chain MUX bypasses the LUT.
Using the shown input conﬁguration, the rightmost
LUT simply computes zcm which is passed over the
21

--- PAGE 5 ---
Figure 5: Overall architecture of the proposed multiplier with 8 ×8 bit unsigned inputs
carry chain MUX to the carry-in of the next higher bit
position.
The following N +1 LUTs (represented by the
2nd right LUT in Figure 4) realize the partial product
generation and addition (the dots in Figure 3). As a
Booth encoder has three inputs and three outputs, it
can be replicated in each LUT A⃝ without cost, saving
an extra (high fanout) Booth encoder for each partial
product. The bit shift, complement and zero setting
(i. e., the Booth decoder) are performed in the same
LUT which is represented by three multiplexers in
Figure 4. The ﬁrst MUX realizes the shift by selecting
between an and an−1 (a−1 is deﬁned to be zero). The
next MUX performs the conditional inversion in case
of a complement and the last MUX sets the partial
product to zero in case of z =1 . The input tr
n denotes
a result of a previous row (or the accumulate input d),
where r = m/2 is the index of the row. This input is
added to the partial product which leads to the result
of the next row shifted by two bits tr+1
n−2. With this
conﬁguration, the complete LUT is utilized with all
inputs to compute the Booth encoding, the decoding
as well as an 1-bit addition which is the key for an
efﬁcient FPGA implementation.
Each row is completed by two LUTs with conﬁg-
uration B⃝ and C⃝ for the sign extension. LUT B⃝ is
used to add cm while LUT C⃝ adds the constant ‘1’
according to Figure 3(b). In the ﬁrst row, the input
t0
N +1 is used to add the additional ‘1’.
Several such rows are cascaded to build the full
multiplier as shown for an 8× 8 multiplier in Figure 5.
Each square represents a LUT and one bit of carry
chain processing. The slices are indicated with thick
lines. It can be seen that the structure is very regular
and has a rectangular shape (which is drawn as a
parallelogram in Figure 5 only for clarity). Note that
some LUTs at MSB side can be removed as their result
can be ignored. Modiﬁcations for signed input numbers
are straight forward and identical to the modiﬁcations
that are necessary in common Booth multipliers [15].
The number of required slices can be exactly pre-
dicted without synthesis. It is equal to the number of
slices per row times the number of rows. Four columns
can be mapped to the four LUTs of a slice leading to
#slices(M, N )= ⌈N/4+1 ⌉  
slices per row
·⌊M/2+1 ⌋  
no of rows
. (7)
Of course, if N (the word size of a) is not divisible by
four, some LUTs of the MSB slices may be available
for other logic. Note that for N ̸= M , it might be
better to swap the operands. For example, with N =9
and M =8 , the multiplier requires 20 slices while for
22