FILE: D:\LiuZhiWei\Documents\STUDTORWORK\研0\SJTU relative project\references\AM-LUT\High-Performance_Accurate_and_Approximate_Multipliers_for_FPGA-Based_Hardware_Accelerators - TCAD22.pdf
PAGES: 14
--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022 211
High-Performance Accurate and Approximate
Multipliers for FPGA-Based Hardware Accelerators
Salim Ullah , Semeen Rehman, Muhammad Shaﬁque , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Akash Kumar , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Multiplication is one of the widely used arithmetic
operations in a variety of applications, such as image/video
processing and machine learning. FPGA vendors provide high-
performance multipliers in the form of DSP blocks. These
multipliers are not only limited in number and have ﬁxed loca-
tions on FPGAs but can also create additional routing delays
and may prove inefﬁcient for smaller bit-width multiplications.
Therefore, FPGA vendors additionally provide optimized soft
IP cores for multiplication. However, in this work, we advocate
that these soft multiplier IP cores for FPGAs still need bet-
ter designs to provide high-performance and resource efﬁciency.
Toward this, we present generic area-optimized, low-latency accu-
rate, and approximate softcore multiplier architectures, which
exploit the underlying architectural features of FPGAs, i.e.,
lookup table (LUT) structures and fast-carry chains to reduce
the overall critical path delay (CPD) and resource utilization of
multipliers. Compared to Xilinx multiplier LogiCORE IP, our
proposed unsigned and signed accurate architecture provides
up to 25% and 53% reduction in LUT utilization, respectively,
for different sizes of multipliers. Moreover, with our unsigned
approximate multiplier architectures, a reduction of up to 51%
in the CPD can be achieved with an insigniﬁcant loss in output
accuracy when compared with the LogiCORE IP. For illustra-
tion, we have deployed the proposed multiplier architecture in
accelerators used in image and video applications, and eval-
uated them for area and performance gains. Our library of
accurate and approximate multipliers is opensource and avail-
able online at https://cfaed.tu-dresden.de/pd-downloads to fuel
further research and development in this area, facilitate repro-
ducible research, and thereby enabling a new research direction
for the FPGA community.
Index Terms —Accelerators, approximate computing, high
performance, multipliers, neural networks, reduced area.
I. I NTRODUCTION
M
ULTIPLICATION is one of the basic arithmetic opera-
tions used extensively in the domain of digital signal
and image processing. FPGA vendors, such as Xilinx and
Manuscript received June 19, 2020; revised November 10, 2020 and
December 30, 2020; accepted January 16, 2021. Date of publication
February 2, 2021; date of current version January 20, 2022. This work was
supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) funded Project ReAp
under Grant 380524764. This article was recommended by Associate Editor
S. Reda. (Corresponding author: Akash Kumar.)
Salim Ullah and Akash Kumar are with the Chair for Processor
Design, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany (e-mail:
salim.ullah@tu-dresden.de; akash.kumar@tu-dresden.de).
Semeen Rehman is with the Institute of Computer Technology,
Technische Universität Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria (e-mail:
semeen.rehman@tuwien.ac.at).
Muhammad Shaﬁque is with the Division of Engineering,
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail:
muhammad.shaﬁque@nyu.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCAD.2021.3056337
TABLE I
C
OMPARISON OF LOGIC VERSUS DSP B LOCK -BASED IMPLEMENTATIONS
FOR THE REED -SOLOMON DECODER AND JPEG E NCODER
Intel, provide DSP blocks to achieve fast multipliers [1].
Despite the high performance offered by these DSP blocks,
their usage might not be efﬁcient in terms of the overall
performance and area requirements for some applications.
Table I compares the critical path delays (CPDs) and lookup
tables (LUTs) utilization of two different implementations
of the Reed–Solomon and JPEG encoders
1 for the Virtex-7
series FPGA using Xilinx Vivado. The routing delay caused
by the location of the allocated DSP blocks has resulted in a
higher latency for the DSP-based implementation of the Reed-
Solomon encoder. For small applications, it may be possible
to perform manual Floorplanning to optimize an applica-
tion’s overall performance. However, for complex applications
with contending requirements for FPGA resources, it may
not be possible to optimize the placement of the required
FPGA resources manually to enhance performance gains.
Similarly, the implementation of the JPEG-encoder shows a
large number of DSP blocks (56% of the total available DSP
blocks) utilization. Such applications can exhaust the avail-
able DSP blocks, making them less available/unavailable for
performance-critical operations of other applications executing
concurrently on the same FPGA, and thereby necessitating
the LUT-based multipliers. Similar results about the DSP
blocks utilization and overall application performance are also
reported by [41]. Therefore, the orthogonal approach of hav-
ing logic-based soft multipliers along with DSP blocks is
important for obtaining overall performance gains in differ-
ent implementation scenarios. That is, why Xilinx and Intel
also provide logic-based soft multipliers [2], [3].
Techniques like [4]–[7] present the modular approach
of designing bigger FPGA-based multipliers using smaller
blocks. However, such techniques prove to be useful for
relatively smaller bit-width multipliers; and for the rela-
tively higher bit-width multipliers, they consume more FPGA
resources. For example, the logic-based implementation of an
accurate 8 × 8 multiplier on Virtex-7 FPGA using Vivado,
with default synthesis options, consumes 71 LUTs. Whereas,
the modular implementation of an accurate 8 × 8 multiplier
using accurate 4 × 4 multipliers consumes 82 LUTs.
1Source codes from http://opencores.org/projects.
1937-4151 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 03:14:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022
Walters [8] and Kumm et al. [9] have used the modi-
ﬁed Booth’s algorithm for area efﬁcient radix-4 multiplier
implementations using 6-input LUTs and associated carry
chains of Xilinx FPGAs. Their implementations avoid par-
tial products (PPs) compressor trees and have large CPDs.
Parandeh-Afshar and Ienne have also used Booth’s and Baugh-
Wooley’s multiplication algorithms for area-efﬁcient multiplier
implementation using Altera FPGAs [10]. However, to reduce
the effective length of carry chains, their implementation lim-
its the length of the adaptive logic modules (ALM) to 5,
which results in the underutilization of the FPGA resources.
Moreover, this feature of limiting the carry chain to ﬁve ALMs
cannot be achieved without wasting resources, with the cur-
rent FPGAs from other vendors, such as those provided by
Xilinx [11]. Parandeh-Afshar et al. [12] have also proposed
a PPs compressor tree using Altera FPGAs. However, their
proposed implementation of generalized parallel counters
(GPCs) underutilizes LUTs in two consecutive ALMs.
Among the other available multiplier design options, the
conventional shift-and-add [13], serial and serial/parallel
multipliers address the low-area requirements but offer very
high CPDs. The commonly used Wallace [14] and Dadda [15]
design-based parallel multipliers have high area require-
ments for achieving low output latencies by parallel addition
of PPs. Considering the characteristics of the Booth and
Wallace/Dadda multiplier schemes, a fast hybrid multiplier
architecture using Radix-4 recoding has been proposed in [16]
for ASIC-based systems. In this article, we show that the
performance of these logic-based soft multipliers can be
further improved by utilizing efﬁcient techniques for PPs
encoding and their reduction. For example, compared to the
multiplier implementation proposed in [9], our proposed accu-
rate multiplier implementation offers a reduction of up to 52%
in the CPD.
As demonstrated by a large body of works, such as [17],
[38], and [39], a wide range of applications do not require
accurate intermediate computations and their operations can
be approximated to further improve performance and energy
efﬁciency. These applications have inherent resilience to
approximation-induced errors and thereby demonstrate the
ability to produce viable outputs despite some of the input-
data/intermediate computation being incorrect or approx-
imate. Examples of such applications can be found in
the domains of image/signal processing, machine learning,
and various other probabilistic algorithms. For the area-
optimized and performance-efﬁcient hardware acceleration of
such applications, both accurate and approximate multipliers
can be utilized. Using the principles of approximate com-
puting, works in [18]–[28] and [32] suggest the use of
functional approximations for designing different types of
approximate adders and multipliers with different performance
gains.
However, most of the state-of-the-art accurate and approx-
imate multiplier architectures consider only ASIC-based
systems. Due to the inherent architectural differences between
FPGAs and ASICs, these ASIC-based multiplier designs
provide limited or no performance gains when directly syn-
thesized for the FPGA-based systems. To further emphasize
the need for designing FPGA-based approximate modules, we
present the following motivational case study comparing the
efﬁciency of both ASIC-based and FPGA-based implementa-
tions of state-of-the-art approximate multipliers that have been
originally designed for ASIC-based systems.
Fig. 1. Cross-platform comparison of area, latency, and EDP. Results are nor-
malized to the corresponding results of ASIC-based and FPGA-based accurate
multipliers.
A. Motivational Case Study
Fig. 1 compares the ASIC-based area, CPD, and energy-
delay-product (EDP) of two state-of-the-art approximate
multipliers, “ S1,” presented in [25], and “ S2,” described
in [23], with their FPGA-based implementations. The ASIC-
based implementation results have been obtained from the
corresponding papers ([23] and [25]), whereas for the FPGA-
based implementations, the Xilinx Vivado tool for the Virtex-7
family has been used. Furthermore, to evaluate the efﬁcacy
of the approximate designs, we have normalized these results
to the implementation results of corresponding ASIC-based
and FPGA-based accurate multipliers, respectively. As shown
by the analysis results, the gains offered by the ASIC-based
implementation are not proportionally translated to the cor-
responding FPGA-based implementation. For example, the
area and EDP gains offered by S1 and S2 are reduced for
the corresponding FPGA-based implementations—in fact, the
approximate implementation of S1 consumes more FPGA
resources than the corresponding accurate design. However,
the CPD is further reduced for both FPGA-based imple-
mentations. This lack of similar performance gains for the
FPGA-based systems is the result of the architectural differ-
ences between ASICs and FPGAs. In ASIC-based designs,
logic gates are deployed for the implementations of differ-
ent logic circuits; thus, a full control over resource utilization
at a ﬁne granularity is possible. However, FPGA-based com-
putational blocks are composed of entirely different entities,
i.e., LUTs, where conﬁguration bits are used to implement an
individual circuit. This poses a research challenge of deﬁning
LUTs-based optimizations to implement accurate and approx-
imate multipliers with signiﬁcant performance gains, which
can help in the realization of efﬁcient FPGA-based hardware
accelerators for error-resilient applications.
B. Our Novel Contributions
To address the above research challenge, we extend our
prior work in [33] and present our methodology of deﬁn-
ing the LUT-level optimization for implementing accurate and
approximate multipliers for FPGA-based systems. The overall
contributions of this article are as follows.
1) Accurate Unsigned Multiplier Design: Utilizing the 6-
input LUTs and associated fast-carry chains of the
state-of-the-art FPGAs, we present a scalable, area-
optimized, and reduced latency architecture of the
accurate multiplier.
2) Single Step PPs Generation and Their Addition :T h e
proposed implementation of the accurate multiplier fuses
the generation and mutual addition of two consecutive
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 03:14:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
ULLAH et al.: HIGH-PERFORMANCE ACCURATE AND APPROXIMATE MULTIPLIERS FOR FPGA-BASED HARDW ARE ACCELERATORS 213
Fig. 2. Summary of the proposed methodology.
partial product rows into one stage. For an NMultiplicand×
MMultiplier multiplier, it results in the concurrent gen-
eration of ( N + 2)-bits long ⌈(M/2)⌉ processed PPs
(PPP).
3) Efﬁcient Partial Product Reduction Tree: For an N × M
multiplier, our automated tool ﬂow organizes the PPPs
in ⌈(M/6)⌉groups. Each group can contain a maximum
of three PPPs. Using 6-input LUTs and the associ-
ated carry chains, our methodology then deploys either
ternary or binary adders for the mutual addition of PPPs
in each group. The total number of stages required to
ﬁnd ﬁnal accurate product is deﬁned by
No. of stages =
⌈
log
3
( M
2
)⌉
+ 1. (1)
4) Accurate Signed Multiplier: Utilizing the Baugh Wooley
multiplication algorithm [37], we extend the “single-step
PPs generation and their addition” technique to com-
pute ⌈(M/2)⌉PPPs for an N × M signed multiplier. Our
methodology adds the generated PPPs to compute the
ﬁnal product by employing our proposed partial product
reduction method.
5) Approximate 4 × 2 Unsigned Multiplier as a build-
ing block to implement higher-order approximate
multipliers. The proposed approximate 4 × 2 multiplier
completely utilizes the six inputs of an LUT of the
state-of-the-art FPGAs.
6) An Approximate 4 × 4 Unsigned Multiplier: To reduce
the number of output errors, we perform different
FPGA-speciﬁc optimizations on the approximate 4 × 2
multiplier and generate an approximate and asymmetric
4 × 4 multiplier.
7) An approximate ternary adder for the summation of the
generated approximate PPs.
Fig. 2 presents an overview of our proposed method-
ology in achieving these contributions. Using the primary
logic resources of FPGAs (related preliminaries discussed
in Section II), we present the accurate multiplier design in
Section III. To reduce the multiplier CPD, we then analyze
the utilized 3:1 compressors (ternary adders) and use var-
ious LUT-level optimization techniques to design different
Fig. 3. Xilinx FPGA slice structure [11]. (a) LUT6 structure. (b) Virtex 7
carry chain.
approximate multipliers in Sections V and VI. Finally, a thor-
ough analysis of the output accuracy and performance gains
of the proposed multipliers compared to the state-of-the-art
multipliers is presented in Section VII. Our accurate and
approximate architectures provide up to a 25% reduction in the
total utilized LUTs when compared with the area-optimized
Xilinx LogiCORE IP [2] for different sizes of multipliers.
Moreover, the proposed approximate architecture achieves a
reduction of up to 51% in the multiplier CPD when com-
pared with the area-optimized LogiCORE IP. For the error
characterization of our proposed multipliers, we have used the
following quality metrics: 1) the number of error occurrences;
2) maximum error magnitude; 3) average relative error; and
4) number of maximum error occurrences. These metrics are
commonly used by the literature for the quality analysis of
approximate arithmetic circuits [22], [23], [29].
The RTL and behavioral models of these accurate and
approximate multipliers are opensource and available online
at https://cfaed.tu-dresden.de/pd-downloads. This will not only
facilitate reproducing the results but will also enable further
research and development at higher abstraction layers.
II. P
RELIMINARIES
A. Xilinx FPGA Slice Structure
State-of-the-art FPGAs, such as those provided by Xilinx
and Intel, utilize 6-input LUTs to implement combinational
and sequential circuits. In this manuscript, we have used Xilinx
FPGAs for the implementation of all designs. However, our
proposed methodology is generic and can be implemented on
FPGAs from other vendors, such as Intel, which also uses
fracturable 6-input LUTs and carry chains.
A slice in the conﬁgurable logic block (CLB) of Xilinx’s
7-series FPGAs have four 6-input LUTs (commonly referred
as LUT6_2) along with eight ﬂip-ﬂops for registering LUTs
outputs and a single 4-bit long carry chain [11]. A LUT6_2
can be used to implement either a single 6-bit combinational
function, using O6 output bit, or two 5-bit combinational func-
tions, using O5 and O6 output bits, by deﬁning an INIT
value, which describes all the possible input combinations for
which a logic value “1” is required at the output. For exam-
ple, an INIT value of 0000000000000002(hex)f o r LUT6_2
deﬁnes to produce outputs O5 = 1& O6 = 0 for input combi-
nation 100001. Besides the implementation of combinational
functions, these 6-input LUTs are also used for controlling
the associated carry chain, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The carry
chain implements a carry-lookahead adder using O5 as the
carry-generate signal and O6 as the carry-propagate signal
as described by (2) and (3). The carry-generate signals for
the carry chain can also be provided by the external bypass
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 03:14:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022
signals AX – DX
Si = Pi ⊕ Ci (2)
Ci+1 = Gi + Pi · Ci. (3)
B. Baugh-Wooley’s Multiplication Algorithm
Compared to unsigned multiplication, all the PPs in a
signed multiplication must be properly sign-extended to com-
pute the accurate product. Baugh-Wooley’s multiplication
algorithm [37] eliminates the need for computing and commu-
nicating sign-extension bits by encoding the sign information
in the generated PPs. For an N × M signed multiplier, (4)
describes the respective operands in 2’s complement rep-
resentation. Equation (5) illustrates the generation of the
signed PPs to compute the ﬁnal product P. Baugh-Wooley’s
multiplication algorithm rewrites the negative partial prod-
uct terms, as described in (6), to eliminate the need for
explicit sign-extension bits. The
axby term in the equation,
for x ∈ [0,..., N − 1] and y ∈ [0,..., M − 1], denotes the
1s complement of the corresponding partial product term. For
example, for an 8 × 8 signed multiplier, (7) represents the
signed PPs according to Baugh-Wooely’s algorithm
A =− aN−12N−1 +
N−2∑
n=0
an2n (4)
B =− bM−12M−1 +
M−2∑
m=0
bm2m
P = aN−1bM−12N+M−2 +
N−2∑
n=0
M−2∑
m=0
anbm2n+m
− 2N−1
M−2∑
m=0
aN−1bm2m − 2M−1
N−2∑
n=0
bM−1an2n (5)
P = aN−1bM−12N+M−2 +
N−2∑
n=0
M−2∑
m=0
anbm2n+m
+ 2N−1
M−2∑
m=0
aN−1bm2m + 2M−1
N−2∑
n=0
bM−1an2n
+ 2N−1 + 2M−1 + 2N+M−1 (6)
P8 = a7b7214 +
6∑
n=0
6∑
m=0
anbm2n+m + 27
6∑
m=0
a7bm2m
+ 27
6∑
n=0
b7an2n + 28 + 215. (7)
III. G ENERIC AREA -OPTIMIZED LOW-LATENCY
UNSIGNED ACCURATE MULTIPLIER ARCHITECTURE
The proposed implementation of the accurate multiplier
is based on the basic method of multiplying two multibit
numbers A
(N-bits) and B(M-bits), as shown in Fig. 4. The multi-
plication results in the generation of M-bit and N-bit PPs with
required shifting. Fig. 5 exhibits the elemental steps of our
proposed implementation to realize an accurate multiplier. It
includes the following operations.
1) Organization of PPs: We have used the 6-input LUTs
for computing the required PPs by performing the AND
Fig. 4. N × M basic multiplier design.
Fig. 5. Proposed design ﬂow of accurate multipliers.
Fig. 6. PP generation for N × M proposed accurate unsigned multiplier.
operation between every bit of multiplier and multipli-
cand. However, to enhance the utilization of LUTs, our
automated methodology groups every two consecutive
PPs. Each group contains the second partial product
shifted left by a single-bit position relative to the ﬁrst
partial product. Furthermore, the PPs in every group
are computed and mutually added in one single step.
However, in every group, there are two partial product
terms, for example, A
0B0 and AN−1B1 in the ﬁrst group,
which are not added with any other partial product term
in their respective group. Moreover, due to the limited
number of input/output pins of LUTs in modern FPGAs,
it is not possible to group more than two partial prod-
uct terms. For example, the generation and addition of
PPs A
2B0, A1B1, and A0B2, as shown by the blue box
in Fig. 4, cannot be performed in a single step.
2) LUTs and Carry Chain Assignment: In this step, our
methodology assigns the 6-input LUTs and the associ-
ated carry chains to each group of PPs, as shown by the
computational blocks Type-A and Type-B in Fig. 6. An
instance of a block, either Type-A or Type-B, denotes a
6-input LUT with an associated adder and carry chain
cell (CC). Fig. 7(a) shows the functionality of the LUT
of block Type-A. The output signals O5 and O6a r e
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 03:14:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ULLAH et al.: HIGH-PERFORMANCE ACCURATE AND APPROXIMATE MULTIPLIERS FOR FPGA-BASED HARDW ARE ACCELERATORS 215
Fig. 7. LUT conﬁguration for accurate unsigned multiplier. (a) LUT of
Type-A. (b) LUT of Type-B.
Fig. 8. Grouping of PPPs to compute ﬁnal product for 16 × 16 multiplier.
passed to the corresponding carry chain as carry gener-
ate ( Gi) and carry propagate ( Pi) signals, respectively.
The LUT conﬁguration for block Type-B, in Fig. 7(b),
uses O5 for the computation of the least signiﬁcant par-
tial product term in each row. The generate signal for
the carry chain element corresponding to block type-B is
constant “0” and provided by the external bypass signal
(AX–DX), as already described in Fig. 3. The associated
carry chain uses (2) and (3) for the generation of sum
bit (S
i) and carry out ( Ci+1) bits. The completion of this
stage of our implementation results in the generation of
(N + 2)-bits long ⌈(M/2)⌉ PPP.
3) Rearrangement and Reduction of PPPs: Our implemen-
tation utilizes ternary and binary adders for reducing
PPPs to a ﬁnal product. Modern FPGAs provide the
capability of implementing a ternary adder as a rip-
ple carry adder (a 3:1 compressor for the simultaneous
reduction of three PPs). Our automated methodology
arranges the PPPs in multiple groups; with the intention
of placing three distinct PPPs in each group. Depending
on the value of M, in Fig. 4, a group may have one,
two, or three PPPs. Our implementation then utilizes
3:1 and 2:1 compressors for reducing PPPs in each
group. The PPPs reduction phase may produce new par-
tial sums, which are again grouped and passed through
3:1 and 2:1 compressors. This process is repeated until
the ﬁnal product is obtained. For example, for a 16 × 16
multiplier, eight PPPs are generated. The grouping and
reduction of these PPPs to compute the ﬁnal product is
described in Fig. 8.
Fig. 9 shows the mapping of the proposed implementa-
t i o nf o ra6×6 accurate multiplier on Xilinx 7-series FPGAs.
However, the same implementation can also be ported to the
Fig. 9. Virtex 7 FPGA slice-based representation of PPP generation for 6 ×6
accurate unsigned multiplier.
TABLE II
TYPE -A LUT C ONFIGURATION
newer versions of FPGAs, such as Virtex UltraScale +.A s
described previously, a computational block of Fig. 6 is equiv-
alent to an LUT and the one bit cell (CC) of associated carry
chain in Fig. 9. Table II deﬁnes the Type-A LUT conﬁgura-
tion for the generation and summation of partial product bits
AY BY and AXBX of Fig. 9. The LUT initially performs the
logical AND operation on ( AY , BY ) and ( AX, BX) and then
produces the O5 (generate) and O6 (propagate) signals. The
values O5 = 0x8000 and O6 = 0x7888 accommodates only
four input values. As discussed in Section II, the INIT value
for LUT6 to produce O5 = 0x8000 and O6 = 0x7888 will be
0x7888788880008000. The INIT value for Type-B LUT con-
ﬁguration is 0xFFFFFFFF80008000 and its conﬁguration is
shown in Table III.
As shown in Fig. 9, three 8-bit long PPPs have been
generated in the ﬁrst stage of multiplication. Our proposed
automated methodology organizes these PPPs in a single group
and utilizes ternary addition for computing the ﬁnal product.
The ternary adder in Fig. 10 shows the computation of the
ﬁnal product bits P
1–P4 by adding three PPs in one step. The
carry out of the slice is forwarded to the carry chain in next
slice for computing other product bits.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 03:14:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 