FILE: D:\LiuZhiWei\Documents\STUDTORWORK\研0\SJTU relative project\references\AM-LUT\QUADOL A Quality-Driven Approximate Logic Synthesis Method Leveraging Dual-Output LUTs for Modern FPGAs.pdf
PAGES: 7
--- PAGE 1 ---
2026 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference (DATE 2026)	
 978-3-9826741-1-7/DATE26/© 2026 EDAA 
	QUADOL: A Quality-Driven Approximate Logic Synthesis Method Leveraging Dual-Output
LUTs for Modern FPGAs
Jian Shi 1, Chang Meng 2, Xuan Wang 3, and Weikang Qian 1
1Global College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; 3Synopsys, Inc., Shanghai, China
2Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, Netherlands
Emails: timeshi@sjtu.edu.cn, c.meng@tue.nl, wangxuan@synopsys.com, qianwk@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract— Modern FPGAs support dual-output LUT to reduce
the area of FPGA designs. Several existing works explored the
use of dual-output LUTs in approximate computing. However,
they are limited to small-scale arithmetic circuits. To address this
issue, we propose QUADOL, a qu
ality-driven a pproximate logic
synthesis (ALS) method leveraging d ual-output LUTs for modern
FPGAs. It can approximately merge two single-output LUTs into a
dual-output LUT. The selection of LUTs for approximate merging
is formulated as a maximum matching problem to maximize
area savings. To further enhance existing ALS methods, we also
propose QUADOL+, a generic framework to integrate QUADOL
into existing ALS methods. Experimental results showed that
QUADOL+ achieves significant area reduction over prior works.
Index Terms—Approximate Computing, Approximate Logic
Synthesis, Dual-output LUT, Approximate LUT Merging, FPGA
I. I NTRODUCTION
Many modern applications, such as image processing and
machine learning, are computationally intensive yet error-
tolerant [1]. Approximate computing leverages this tolerance to
trade accuracy for improved performance and energy efficiency.
One important area of approximate computing is designing ap-
proximate circuits for field-programmable gate array (FPGA),
which is composed of reconfigurable look-up tables (LUTs).
Modern FPGAs support advanced dual-output LUTs, which
enable dramatic reduction of the number of required LUTs [2]–
[5]. A notable method was proposed to exactly merge two
single-output LUTs into one dual-output LUT using local
refinement strategies [6]. This process is called LUT merging,
and the two merged LUTs are called a LUT pair.
Several works explored the use of dual-output LUTs in the
design of approximate arithmetic units on FPGAs [7]–[14].
However, they can only be applied to specific types of circuits,
such as multipliers [8]–[14] and adders [7]. In addition, they
can only be applied to small-scale circuits. For example, the
bit-widths of the multipliers in [8]–[13] do not exceed 8.
To design general approximate circuits, approximate logic
synthesis (ALS) for FPGA was proposed [15]–[19]. It aims
to automatically generate a high-quality circuit with a small
error but a large area and delay reduction [20]. For example,
Meng et al. proposed ALSRAC, which iteratively replaces
signals in an AND-inverter graph (AIG) with new functions
derived from existing signals, and maps the approximated AIG
into LUTs [17]. Xiang et al. proposed to iteratively decompose
a Boolean function approximately to minimize the number of
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62574132 and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai under
Grant 25ZR1401189. Corresponding author: Weikang Qian.
LUT-5    
LUT-5    
1
0
LUT6_2
Fig. 1: Architecture of dual-output LUTs in the UltraScale+
series FPGA.
LUTs [18]. However, existing ALS methods on FPGA only
consider single-output LUTs and fail to leverage dual-output
LUTs available on modern FPGAs.
To solve the above issues, we propose QUADOL, a qu ality-
driven ALS method leveraging d ual-output L UTs for modern
FPGAs. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose an approximate LUT merging technique,
which approximately merges a LUT pair into a dual-output
LUT to reduce the number of LUTs needed for a design,
while minimizing the error introduced by approximation.
• To maximize area savings, we formulate a maximum
matching problem to select a maximal number of LUT
pairs for approximate merging.
• Based on the above techniques, we propose QUADOL, a
new ALS method leveraging dual-output LUTs. We also
propose to use binary search to accelerate QUADOL.
• To further enhance existing ALS methods, we also in-
troduce QUADOL+, a generic framework for integrating
QUADOL into existing ALS methods.
• We make the code for QUADOL and QUADOL+ open-
sourced at https://github.com/SJTU-ECTL/QUADOL.
Experimental results showed that QUADOL+ reduces the
LUT count by up to 17.9% compared to the state-of-the-art
ALS method for FPGA. Moreover, the approximate multipliers
optimized by QUADOL+ dominate most prior FPGA-based
approximate multipliers in the area-error plane.
II. P RELIMINARIES
A. Dual-output LUT
A LUT with k inputs, denoted as LUT-k, can represent
any Boolean function with k inputs. In several modern FPGA
architectures, two small LUTs can be merged into a dual-output
LUT, reducing the area of the design. In this work, we focus
on the dual-output LUT architecture in the UltraScale+ series
FPGA [2], which is shown in Fig. 1. The dual-output LUT,
denoted as LUT6
2, is composed of two LUT-5s, A and B,
sharing five same inputs I0, . . . , I4. In Fig. 1, the output from
LUT B provides the first output O5, while the second output

--- PAGE 2 ---
O6 is determined by an additional input I5 that selects between
the outputs of the two LUT-5s.
B. Error Metrics
Error metrics are used to evaluate the accuracy of approxi-
mate circuits. In this work, two error metrics are used: error
rate (ER) and mean relative error distance (MRED). ER is the
probability that the circuit output is wrong. MRED measures
the average relative error distance, calculated as MRED =P2I
i=1
| ˆyi−yi|·pi
max{yi,1} , where I is the number of primary inputs (PIs),
yi and ˆyi are integers encoded by the exact and approximate
outputs, respectively, for the i-th input combination, and pi is
the probability of the i-th input combination. The denominator
is set as max {yi, 1} to avoid division by zero.
In practice, for efficiency, ER and MRED are estimated
via random logic simulation over M randomly sampled input
combinations under a given distribution instead of using all
possible input combinations [15], [17], [18].
III. M ETHODOLOGY
This section details the methodology of QUADOL and
QUADOL+, both targeting combinational circuits. Sec-
tion III-A introduces the basic idea of approximate LUT
merging. To reduce the error introduced by approximate LUT
merging, Section III-B presents a method to identify the optimal
configuration for the dual-output LUT merged from a LUT pair.
Section III-C formulates the LUT pair selection problem as a
maximum matching problem to maximize merging opportunity.
Based on the above techniques, Sections III-D and III-E finally
present the flows of QUADOL and QUADOL+, respectively.
A. Approximate LUT Merging
Traditional LUT merging combines two single-output LUTs
(i.e., a LUT pair) into one LUT with dual outputs. The con-
straints for exactly merging two LUTs are strict. For instance,
merging two distinct LUT-6s into a LUT6
2 shown in Fig. 1 is
infeasible since the output O5 can only express a function with
up to five inputs. To further reduce the number of used LUTs,
we propose approximate LUT merging. It allows approximately
merging two single-output LUTs into a dual-output LUT, while
only introducing a minimal error.
Suppose that the functions of the two single-output LUTs
are F and G, respectively, and their input signals are IF and
IG, respectively. After the approximate LUT merging, the dual-
output LUT implements approximate versions of F and G,
denoted as eF and eG, respectively, and the input signals of the
dual-output LUT are also properly configured, denoted as IF,G.
Fig. 2 shows an example of approximate LUT merging, where
we assume that the single-output LUTs are LUT-3s and the
truth table of a Boolean function is represented by a row vector.
To implement F and G with a dual-output LUT, we introduce
approximation by flipping some entries in their truth tables, i.e.,
the red entries in Fig. 2(b).
In what follows, for simplicity, we use the term “merging
functions F and G” to mean merging their corresponding
LUTs, and we denote the merged LUT pair F and G as (F, G).
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 2: Approximately merging two single-output LUTs into
one dual-output LUT: (a) before merging; (b) after merging.
For a given LUT pair (F, G), we aim to reduce the error
introduced by the approximate functions eF and eG after ap-
proximate merging. To measure the error brought by different
choices of eF and eG, we introduce the concept of Hamming
Distance (HD). Specifically, the HD between an exact function
Y and its approximate function eY is defined as the number of
the input combinations where Y and eY have different output
values. We denote it as HD(Y, eY ). For the example in Fig. 2(b),
HD(F, eF ) = 1 and HD(G, eG) = 2. We define the error e
brought by approximating F and G into eF and eG as:
e = HD(F, eF ) +HD(G, eG). (1)
The objective is to find functions eF and eG that minimize the
error e under the constraint that eF and eG must be realizable
by the dual-output LUT architecture.
B. Configuring Dual-output LUT for Approximate Merging
This section proposes a method to determine the optimal
configuration for the dual-output LUT. Most commercial FP-
GAs use LUT-6s as their fundamental LUT units [2]–[5].
Once a circuit is mapped into such FPGAs, LUT-5s and LUT-
6s occupy a large percentage of all mapped LUTs, and by
approximately merging these LUTs into dual-output LUTs,
we can substantially reduce the total LUT count. Therefore,
we focus on approximately merging LUT-5s and LUT-6s in
this work. Specifically, we target three types of LUT pairs
for approximate merging: 1) two LUT-6s sharing six identical
inputs; 2) two LUT-6s sharing five identical inputs; 3) one LUT-
6 and one LUT-5 sharing five identical inputs. We call these
three type of LUT pairs mergeable LUT pairs. Moreover, we
focus on the dual-output LUT architecture shown in Fig. 1.
However, it is worth noting that our method can be adapted to
other architectures with simple modifications. Next, we discuss
how we approximately merge the three types of LUT pairs.
1) Merging two LUT-6s sharing six identical inputs: Let
F and G be the functions of two LUT-6s sharing six in-
puts x0, x1, . . . , x5. The configuration of LUT6
2 depends on
the signals assigned to I0, I1, . . . , I5 and the assignment of
F and G to two outputs O5 and O6 of the LUT6 2. To
minimize the error introduced by approximate LUT merging,
we should keep as many original inputs as possible. Thus,
five out of x0, x1, . . . , x5 should be assigned to I0, I1, . . . , I4.
The remaining input, denoted as xi, is assigned to I5 or not
used. Therefore, I5 is chosen from the set {1, xi,
xi}, where
i ∈ {0, 1, . . . ,5}, and I0, I1, . . . , I4 are assigned with the other
inputs signals. Note that
• The choices of I5 include xi. This is because due to the
configurability of the truth table of a LUT, the signal xi
can be generated by negating the output of the LUT of xi.
In this case, for each LUT originally using xi as an input,

--- PAGE 3 ---
TABLE I: Configurations for LUT6 2 when merging two LUT-
6s with six identical inputs.
I5 F G LUT A LUT B
xi O6 O5 Fxi Maj(Fxi , Gxi , Gxi )
xi O5 O6 Gxi Maj(Fxi , Fxi , Gxi )
xi O6 O5 Fxi Maj(Fxi , Gxi , Gxi )
xi O5 O6 Gxi Maj(Fxi , Fxi , Gxi )
xi O6 O6 Fxi or Gxi Fxi or Gxi
1 O6 O5 Fxi or Fxi Gxi or Gxi
to keep its global function, we should change its local
function by replacing input xi with xi. The only exception
is that when xi is a PI or a primary output (PO), xi is not
considered, as we need additional LUTs to generate xi.
• The choices of I5 do not include 0. This is because when
the constant 0 is assigned to I5, LUT-5 A is not used (see
Fig. 1), which has a larger error compared to the case
where I5 is assigned with constant 1.
For functions F and G, they are derived from the set
{O5, O6}. Based on the above discussion, we list all config-
urations in Table I. Next, we will discuss how to derive the
optimal functions for LUT-5s A and B for each configuration.
Row 1 of Table I corresponds to the case wherexi is assigned
to I5, and F and G are derived from O6 and O5, respectively.
By Shannon decomposition, the approximate expressions for F
and G can be written as eF = xiA +
xiB and eG = xiB + xiB,
respectively, where A and B represent the functions for LUT-
5s A and B in Fig. 1, respectively. Since F = xiFxi + xiFxi,
where Fxi and Fxi are the cofactors of F when xi is true and
false, respectively,HD(F, eF ) equals HD(A, Fxi )+HD(B, Fxi ).
Similarly, HD(G, eG) =HD(B, Gxi ) +HD(B, Gxi ). Therefore,
HD(F, eF ) +HD(G, eG) equals HD(A, Fxi ) +HD(B, Fxi ) +
HD(B, Gxi )+ HD(B, Gxi ). To minimize the term HD(A, Fxi ),
A should be set to Fxi. To minimize the remaining parts, B
can be determined through the majority among Fxi, Gxi and
Gxi, i.e., B = Maj(Fxi , Gxi , Gxi ) [21].
Row 2 of Table I corresponds to the case wherexi is assigned
to I5, and G is mapped to O6 and F to O5. It is equivalent to
swapping F and G in row 1. Thus, A and B can be directly
obtained by swapping F and G in the expressions for A and
B in row 1. Rows 3 and 4 of Table I correspond to assigning
xi to I5, which is equivalent to swapping xi and xi in rows 1
and 2. Thus, A and B can be derived by swapping xi and xi
in the expressions for A and B in rows 1 and 2.
Row 5 of Table I covers a special case where xi is assigned
to I5, and both F and G are derived from O6. In this case,
HD(F, eF ) +HD(G, eG) equals HD(A, Fxi ) +HD(B, Fxi ) +
HD(A, Gxi ) +HD(B, Gxi ). Thus, A is set to either Fxi or
Gxi, and B to either Fxi or Gxi, as both options yield the
same total HD. To determine the optimal choice, a simulation
for each choice is performed, and the one causing the least
error in the POs is chosen. Note that we ignore the case where
xi is assigned to I5 and both F and G are derived from O6. Its
optimal solution can be derived by swapping the expressions
for A and B in row 5, and the optimal total HD is the same.
Also, we ignore the case where both F and G are derived from
O5, as it leaves LUT-5 A unused, causing a higher error than
the case represented by row 5.
Row 6 of Table I presents another special case where the
constant 1 is assigned to I5, making LUT6
2 operate as two
separate LUT-5s, with one producingF and the other producing
G. Suppose LUT A produces F and B produces G. As a result,
F is derived from O6, and G from O5. Thus, A should be either
Fxi or Fxi, and B should be either Gxi or Gxi. Note that there
is no need to consider the case where LUT A produces G and
B produces F , as it yields the same optimal total HD.
In the proposed approximate LUT merging method, the
optimal total HD for each row in Table I is calculated. The
configuration with the smallest total HD is selected as the
optimal configuration for xi. Since xi is unknown, we perform
the above procedure for each xi ∈ {x0, x1, . . . , x5}. Among
these choices, we select the one with the smallest total HD as
the optimal solution for merging F and G. To further improve
accuracy, we actually consider two function pairs, (F, G) and
(
F , G), for approximate merging. The pair with the smallest
HD is eventually selected. If (F , G)is selected, an input
negation is performed on the LUTs with F as an input to restore
their functions. Note that the pairs (F ,G) and (F, G) are not
considered, as their configurations can be derived by negating
A and B from those of (F, G) and (
F , G), respectively, yielding
the same HDs and errors in the POs.
2) Merging two LUT-6s sharing five identical inputs: Let
the shared inputs of F and G be x0, x1, . . . , x4 and the
unique inputs of F and G be m and n, respectively. Thus,
functions F and G are independent of n and m, respectively. In
LUT6 2, both O6 and O5 depends on I0, I1, . . . , I4, while O5
is independent of I5. Therefore, to minimize the approximation
error, a good choice is to assign the shared inputs of F and
G, x0, x1, . . . , x4, to I0, I1, . . . , I4. Similar to merging two
LUT-6s with six identical inputs, the remaining input, I5,
should be chosen from the set {1, m,m, n,n}. Table II lists
all configurations for the LUT6 2.
As shown in Table I, when merging two LUT-6s with six
identical inputs, after assigning xi to I5, the assignment of
F and G to two outputs O6 and O5 of the LUT6 2 should
be further considered since F and G both depend on xi.
In contrast, merging two LUT-6s with five identical inputs
yields more deterministic assignments. For example, when m is
assigned to I5, G should be mapped to O5, as G is independent
of m. Accordingly, F is assigned to O6. This principle also
applies when I5 is set to n,
m, or n, where the function
independent of the selected signal is always assigned to O5.
Rows 1–4 in Table II correspond to these four cases. The
optimal configurations for A and B for each case are derived
based on cofactors and Shannon decomposition in a similar
way as merging two LUT-6s sharing six identical inputs. Row
5 presents the case where constant 1 is assigned to I5. It is
similar to the case corresponding to the last row of Table I and
hence, its optimal configuration can be derived similarly.
3) Merging one LUT-6 and one LUT-5 sharing five identical
inputs: Let F be the function for the LUT-6 and G be the
function for the LUT-5. Denote their shared five inputs as
x0, x1, . . . , x4 and the unique input for F as m. Thus, G is
independent of m. By a similar analysis used above, we can

--- PAGE 4 ---
TABLE II: Configurations for LUT6 2 when merging two
LUT-6s with five identical inputs.
I5 F G LUT A LUT B
m O6 O5 Fm Maj(Fm, Gn, Gn)
n O5 O6 Gn Maj(Fm, Fm, Gn)
m O6 O5 Fm Maj(Fm, Gn, Gn)
n O5 O6 Gn Maj(Fm, Fm, Gn)
1 O6 O5 Fm or Fm Gn or Gn
TABLE III: Configurations for LUT6 2 when merging a LUT-
6 and a LUT-5 with five identical inputs.
I5 F G LUT A LUT B
m O6 O5 Fm Fm or G
m O6 O5 Fm Fm or G
1 O6 O5 Fm or Fm G
obtain all configurations for LUT6 2 listed in Table III.
C. Selecting Multiple LUT Pairs
To reduce the number of LUTs used in the final design,
we try to merge as many LUT pairs as possible. However,
conflicts may arise when multiple candidate LUT pairs share a
common LUT. For example, if LUT pairs (F, G) and (G, K)
are individually mergeable, they cannot be merged simulta-
neously, as signal G cannot be driven by multiple sources.
Therefore, when two LUT pairs share the same LUT member,
they are in conflict and cannot be merged simultaneously. To
maximize area reduction, we select the largest subset of non-
conflicting LUT pairs. To achieve this, a graph is constructed
where each node represents a LUT, and an edge between two
nodes means that the pair of LUTs corresponding to the two
nodes is mergeable, i.e., belonging to the three types of LUT
pairs described in Section III-B. Fig. 3(a) shows an example
of such a graph with 6 LUTs. Our goal is to identify the
maximum number of disjoint edges, which can be efficiently
solved using a maximum matching algorithm [22]. All LUT
pairs corresponding to the identified edges are then merged
simultaneously to form an approximate circuit. For example, as
shown in Fig. 3(a), the three LUT pairs denoted as the edges
marked with red circles can be merged simultaneously.
Results of Maximum MatchingMergeable LUT Pair Skipped LUT Pair
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 3: Two different maximum matching solutions.
A given graph may have multiple maximum matching so-
lutions. For example, Figs. 3(a) and (b) show two distinct
maximum matchings for the same graph. As obtaining all
such solutions is computationally expensive, we propose a
randomized method to find k different maximum matching
solutions for each graph, where k is a user-specified number.
Specifically, once a new maximum matching solution is found,
one of its LUT pairs is randomly chosen and excluded from
the search for the next solution. For example, the dashline in
Fig. 3(b) means that the LUT pair is randomly chosen and
excluded after the solution in Fig. 3(a) is found. This ensures
that the new solution in Fig. 3(b) is different from the initial
solution in Fig. 3(a).
Neither More
nor Fewer
Mergeable LUT Pair (Lighter color represents larger error to the primary output)
LUT
(a)
Mergeable LUT Pairs
(b)
Candidate LUT Pairs
(c)
Start
First Iteration
Find Maximum
Matchings
Matching #2Matching #1
(d)
All Errors
Exceed      ?
Yes No
More Candidates
(f)
Fewer Candidates
(e)
Next
Iteration
(g)
Merged LUT PairPruned LUT Pair
Newly-Pruned LUT Pair New Candidate LUT Pair
Logic Simulation
Approximate
Netlist
Exact Netlist
Fig. 4: The overall flow of QUADOL.
D. Flow of QUADOL
This section presents the entire flow of QUADOL, which
is based on the approximate dual-output LUT configuration
method in Section III-B and the LUT pair selection method in
Section III-C. Fig. 4 illustrates the overall flow of QUADOL.
It leverages the idea of binary search to speed up the process.
Initially, QUADOL identifies all mergeable LUT pairs in the
given exact netlist (see Fig. 4(a)), which are represented by
the edges in Fig. 4(b). However, some of them may induce
large errors after approximate LUT merging and, hence, should
be pruned before the search for optimal LUT pairs. Thus, for
each LUT pair, QUADOL evaluates its error at the POs using
random logic simulation (see Section II-B). In Fig. 4, lighter-
colored edges represent LUT pairs with larger errors. Then,
QUADOL starts an iterative process, illustrated in Figs. 4(c)–
(f). In the first iteration, half of the LUT pairs with the largest
errors are pruned, indicated by the red crosses in Fig. 4(c).
The remaining LUT pairs are referred to as candidate LUT
pairs. Then, as shown in Fig. 4(d), QUADOL searches for k
maximum matching solutions, where k = 2in this example. For
each solution, all matched LUT pairs are merged, resulting in
k approximate circuits. These circuits are evaluated via random
simulation to get their errors. If their errors all exceed the
given error bound eb, half of the current candidate LUT pairs
with larger errors are further pruned, indicated by the green
crosses in Fig. 4(e). Otherwise, if any circuit satisfies the error
bound, half of the previously pruned LUT pairs with smaller
errors are reconsidered as the candidate LUT pairs in the next
iteration, indicated by the dashed edges in Fig. 4(f). This binary
search-inspired process continues until the candidate LUT pairs
can neither be increased nor decreased. Then, k maximum
matchings are randomly constructed over the current candidate
LUT pairs, and the one with the lowest output error is selected
as the final solution (see Fig. 4(g)).
E. Flow of QUADOL+
Since QUADOL explores a new dimension, i.e., approxi-
mately merging LUT pairs into dual-output LUTs, which is
never considered by the previous ALS methods, it can be
integrated with any existing ALS methods to strengthen them.
Thus, we also propose QUADOL+, a generic framework to
integrate QUADOL into existing ALS methods. Given an exact
netlist and several other ALS methods, QUADOL+ first applies

--- PAGE 5 ---
these ALS methods to the exact netlist to generate many
intermediate approximate netlists. Then, it calls QUADOL to
further optimize the intermediate netlists. Finally, it returns the
best result optimized by QUADOL as the final result.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents the experimental results. We conduct
all experiments on a 64-core AMD Threadripper PRO 5995WX
CPU running at 2.7GHz with 512GB RAM and use 32 cores for
our experiments. In our experiments, we set the inputs for each
circuit to be uniformly distributed. Each random logic simula-
tion used for measuring the error at the POs uses 131,072 (2 17)
uniformly-distributed input patterns. The area ratio, defined as
the number of LUTs in the approximate circuit over that of the
exact one, and the runtime of various approaches are reported.
The number of maximum matching solutions per iteration, k, is
set to 16. All generated approximate circuits were successfully
synthesized using AMD Xilinx Vivado 2022.2 [23].
A. Comparison with Prior ALS Methods
In this section, we compare QUADOL and QUADOL+ with
two state-of-the-art ALS methods for FPGA, ALSRAC [17] and
Xiang’s method [18]. Both ALSRAC and Xiang’s method are
executed 10 times per error constraint. The best result among
the 10 trials along with its corresponding runtime is reported
for comparison. The intermediate AIGs from the best trial of
ALSRAC are mapped to LUT-6 netlists, which are used as
the intermediate netlists for QUADOL+. Both QUADOL and
QUADOL+ are executed once.
Some large circuits from the EPFL [24] and IWLS [25]
benchmark suites are used to evaluate the performance of
QUADOL and QUADOL+. Table IV lists these circuits, along
with their AIG node counts and the LUT numbers after
mapping. EPFL circuits have already been mapped to LUT-
6s. For IWLS circuits, which are not initially mapped to LUT-
6s, we fully optimize them and map them to LUT-6s using
ABC [26] with the script “sweep; strash; resyn2 × 10; if -K 6;”.
TABLE IV: Benchmarks used in our experiments.
IWLS Benchmark EPFL Arithmetic
Circuit #AIG
Nodes #LUTs Circuit #AIG
Nodes #LUTs Circuit #AIG
Nodes #LUTs
apex1 1090 490 rd84 500 131 divisor 57247 3267
apex3 1143 527 rot 839 188 log2 32060 6567
apex4 1423 799 seq 2952 883 multiplier 27062 4919
cps 1329 434 table3 755 333 sine 5416 1227
dalu 2626 228 table5 734 291 sqrt 24618 3074
des 2509 1104 vda 198 237 square 18486 3241
ex5p 1471 526
1) Comparison under ER constraint: We compare
QUADOL+ with ALSRAC and Xiang’s method using
IWLS circuits under ER constraint. Table V lists the area
ratio and runtime for each circuit, averaged over two ER
constraints, 1% and 2%. Bold entries highlight the cases
where QUADOL+ outperforms both baselines. QUADOL+
consistently outperforms Xiang’s method in both circuit area
and runtime. On average, QUADOL+ generates approximate
circuits with an area ratio of 73.1%, further improving
Xiang’s method by 17.9% and ALSRAC by 2.3%. However,
QUADOL+ is 1.5× slower than ALSRAC because it relies
on the intermediate netlists generated by ALSRAC for further
optimization. Hence, its runtime includes both the time for
the best-performing ALSRAC trial and that of QUADOL to
process the intermediate netlists.
Note that in this experiment, QUADOL is excluded as it
outperforms none of the baselines under the ER constraint. This
is because QUADOL only considers HD during approximate
LUT merging, ignoring the input probabilities of merged LUT
pairs, which are important under the ER constraint. In contrast,
QUADOL+ can further enhance the performance of other ALS
methods, leading to improved results.
TABLE V: Comparison of Xiang’s method [18], ALSRAC [17],
and QUADOL+ under ER constraint.
Circuit Average Area Ratio Average Runtime (s)
[18] [17] QUADOL+ [18] [17] QUADOL+
apex1 95.7% 85.3% 84.0% 1946 973 1459
apex3 97.1% 90.4% 89.5% 2211 1106 1658
apex4 97.6% 93.2% 92.8% 5396 2698 4047
cps 55.5% 35.9% 34.9% 730 365 547
dalu 85.1% 73.9% 72.6% 305 153 229
des 96.0% 58.9% 57.5% 8124 4062 6093
ex5p 90.1% 75.6% 69.8% 2098 1049 1574
rd84 97.3% 70.2% 61.5% 115 58 86
rot 97.1% 89.1% 88.0% 152 76 114
seq 89.6% 79.2% 77.3% 5385 2693 4039
table3 93.2% 69.1% 67.9% 917 459 688
table5 92.3% 74.7% 72.7% 664 332 498
vda 96.0% 84.6% 82.3% 449 225 337
Arithmean 91.0% 75.4% 73.1% 2192 1096 1644
2) Comparison under MRED constraint: We compare
QUADOL and QUADOL+ with ALSRAC using EPFL circuits
under MRED constraint. Xiang’s method is excluded as it
does not support MRED. Table VI lists the area ratio and
runtime, averaged across three MRED thresholds, 0.05%, 0.1%,
and 0.5%. QUADOL often performs worse than ALSRAC, as
ALSRAC works on AIG, which is more fine-grained than the
LUT netlist that QUADOL works on, hence offering more opti-
mization opportunity. In contrast, the combination of QUADOL
and ALSRAC, i.e., QUADOL+, improves ALSRAC’s area ratio
by 6.3% by utilizing dual-output LUTs, a feature not exploited
by ALSRAC. Notably, for the div circuit, QUADOL+ reduces
22.0% more area over ALSRAC. For the multiplier circuit,
QUADOL+ shows less than 1% improvement, as ALSRAC
has already reduced its area to 9.5% of the exact circuit.
Nonetheless, QUADOL+ identifies and merges several LUT
pairs within the error constraints, further decreasing the area.
For the sqrt circuit, QUADOL+ shows no improvement over
ALSRAC, for which ALSRAC already achieves a 96.8% area
reduction. ALSRAC achieves such a large area reduction be-
cause it aggressively simplifies the logic cones of the least
significant output bits, which dominate the area in sqrt.
In terms of delay, neither QUADOL nor QUADOL+ affects
the delay of an FPGA design, as their key method, approximate
LUT merging, only merges existing LUTs without affecting the
length of each path in the design.
B. Comparison with Prior Approximate Multipliers for FPGA
In this section, we study the performance of QUADOL+ in
synthesizing FPGA-based approximate multipliers. We use ap-
proximate multipliers from EvoApproxLib [27], a widely-used